# Data Modeling with Postgres

This is the first project for Udacity's Data Engineering Nano Degree.  The goals of this project were to explore and exercise:
* Data modeling in Postgres
* Creating a star-schema
* Creating a simple ETL with Python
    
## Summary
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

## Data
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by an event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

#### Example song file:
    {"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

#### Example log file:
    {"artist":null,"auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Walter","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Frye","length":null,"level":"free","location":"San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA","method":"GET","page":"Home","registration":1540919166796.0,"sessionId":38,"song":null,"status":200,"ts":1541105830796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"39"}

## Database Schema
The database uses a star schema with one fact and four dimension tables.  
A Relational Database was chosen for this project because:
- The datatypes are structured
- We have a relatively small data set
- The analysis is easly accomplished in SQL with JOINS


### Fact Table
1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong.
    - songplay_id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    - start_time BIGINT NOT NULL,
    - user_id TEXT NOT NULL,
    - level TEXT,
    - song_id TEXT NOT NULL,
    - artist_id TEXT NOT NULL,
    - session_id INT,
    - location TEXT,
    - user_agent TEXT
### Dimension Tables

2. users - users in the app.
    - user_id INT PRIMARY KEY,
    - first_name TEXT NOT NULL,
    - last_name TEXT NOT NULL,
    - gender TEXT,
    - level TEXT

3. songs - songs in music database
    - song_id TEXT PRIMARY KEY
    - title TEXT NOT NULL,
    - artist_id TEXT NOT NULL,
    - year INT,
    - duration NUMERIC(9, 5)

4. artists - artists in music database
    - artist_id TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
    - name TEXT NOT NULL,
    - location TEXT,
    - latitude NUMERIC(8, 5),
    - longitude NUMERIC(8, 5)

5. time - timestamps of records in *songplays* broken down into specific units.

    - start_time BIGINT PRIMARY KEY,
    - hour INT,
    - day INT,
    - week INT,
    - month INT,
    - year INT,
    - weekday INT
## Project Files

- **test.ipynb** displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.
- **create_tables.py** drops and creates the tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
- **etl.ipynb** reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into the tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
- **etl.py** reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into the tables.
- **sql_queries.py** contains all the sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.

## Contributions
Starter code provided by Udacity, Functionality implemented by
* Ryan Graham - [Github](https://github.com/ryanxgraham)